Hello.
You're going to learn the basics
of a powerful programming construct,
the array.
Nearly every programming
language in widespread use
uses a similar structure to be able to
represent many items with one variable.
When you wrote code to help
a genome scientist solve a problem,
you could count the number of occurrences
of each c, g, t and a in a strand of DNA.
This is a real problem,
that helps find protein coating
regions rich in c,g content.
As a programmer learning
about encryption and
decryption, you'll need to count
the number of recurrences of a, b,
c and every letter of
the alphabet through x, y and z.
26 counters.
To be able to break a Caesar cipher or
decrypt a message encrypted with a Caesar
cipher, although you could do this
with 26 variables,
learn a new concept to help with decoding.
We'll learn about arrays, which
are homogeneous collections of values.
Here you see post office mailboxes,
they each look the same, but
each is numbered differently.
You can access box number 344 or box 345.
And you can either store letters and
packages in a box, or
take them out of the box.
Arrays are similar
concepts in programming.
As you'll see one array could
represent 26, or 1,026 counters,
if your alphabet was huge, or
if you were solving a different problem.
Let's look at code to
help a genomic scientist.
We'll look at code that counts
occurrences of c, g, t, and a.
To understand and motivate
the problem of counting 26 letters.
As you can see,
we've created four counters.
Initialized each one to zero, and
then incremented the appropriate counter,
as we process every nucleotide
in a digital strand of DNA.
This solution works, but it's very
hard to scale having 26 counters,
which we would need to count
every letter A through Z as
part of decrypting a message
encrypted using a Caesar Cipher.
This isn't conceptually hard.
We could use CA, CB, CC, and so
on up through variables CY and
CZ to have 26 variables.
And we're gonna have 26, if statements
to increment the appropriate variable.
But writing the code and changing what
we do with 26 values is time consuming,
and difficult to change if we want
to print something different, for
example, when looking at the output.
We'll use an array, an indexed collection,
to use one variable in place of 26.
We'll break the Caesar cipher by
counting occurrences of each character
in an encrypted message.
A message in English would
typically have the letter e
as the most frequently
occurring character.
So, once we found how many times each
character occurs in an encrypted message
it's likely that this character is E,
and we can determine the shift using
used them encrypting the message
making the description process easy.
In general, counting and collecting values
in an important tool in running programs,
so learning about arrays and
the context of breaking a Caesar cipher
will help in solving many other problems.
You've seen the class storage resource,
which was helpful in
storing string values.
That class was useful but
it's use was limited.
We'll expand on the idea of arrays,
and the storage resource class later.
For now, we need an indexed collection.
Like the collection of mailboxes we saw,
in which a number is used to
access a specific location.
This is the same concept you've seen with
strings, in which an index is used to
access a particular character in a string
using the .charAt or .substring methods.
Arrays can store any type of value, not
just the type char that's used in strings.
We'll look at the concepts and
code in using arrays.
And see how they're similar to what
you've seen before with strings.
You define an array similarly
to defining a string.
When defining a string variable as you see
here, you indicate the characters that
are in the string and
assign these characters to a variable.
With an array, you must specify how
many storage locations there are.
And use the square brackets
with the variable name
to indicate the variable is an array.
This code allocates 256 memory locations,
each one holding
an int with a value zero, which is
the default value of integers in an array.
The concept of indexing is used to access
elements of a string, and an array.
With a string,
the .charAt method is used with an index
to access a specific character.
The first character is zero,
because we use zero based indexing.
With arrays, the bracket operator
acts as a specific element,
again with zero based indexing.
When writing code, you often need to know
the number of characters in a string, or
the number of elements in an array.
With a string,
you use the Dot Length method to
determine how many characters
there are in the string.
With an array,
you use the values stored in
Dot Length to access the number of storage
locations allocated for the array.
Note that that length is not a method for
arrays.
This is sometimes a source of
confusion when writing code.
We'll look at the code to count
the number of occurrences of
every character a through z.
You'll see this code and
the concepts in it will help you
solve many problems when programming.
In this code,
you'll see a variable named counters that
will represent 26 different counters.
The code will store the number of
occurrences of a in counters subzero.
We use sub as a shorthand for subscript,
a term coming from mathematics.
We'll see that counter sub k Is the number
of occurrences of the kth letter.
By this we mean if the number
of b's is at counter sub one and
the number of z's is a counters sub 25.
As you look at the code,
you will see there at three parts.
Just as there were with the code that
counted the number of occurrences
of c,g,a and t.
In the string representing DNA.
In that code, four counters were
defined and initialized to the zero.
Here, there are 26 counters defined,
and initialized to the zero.
The array reference are variable counters
takes the place of 26 different variables.
In the DNA counting code,
we used a sequence of four,
if statements to determine
which counter to increment.
Here, we used the location of
a character in the string alpha,
as the index of the appropriate
counter to increment.
Note that A has index zero.
We even use both upper and lowercase As,
using the Character.toLowerCase method,
so that the index value returned
by alpha.indexOf helps us
increment the appropriate storage
location in the counters array.
Finally, to print each result,
we use the loop index K to both access
the kth value stored in alpha, and the kth
value stored in the counters array.
You'll gain experience in
solving problems with array.
Here's quick summary of
what we've just introduced.
Arrays are indexed collections of values.
When defining an array, you will
typically provide an integer value
indicating how many elements
can be stored in the array.
It's possible to define a variable like x,
as you see here,
with no storage allocated for it,
simply to define the type of the variable.
This could be useful, for example,
as a parameter in a method.
If you define an array by calling new
you must provide an integer value for
the number of array elements.
In an int array,
all locations will be initialized to zero.
For a string array, all array
locations are initialized to null.
That is the value we have seen
before that indicated there is no
object being referenced.
Array locations are red and
written using indexes.
You can store a value in an array,
as shown here.
With S sub 3 getting the string hello.
This is writing a value
into an array location.
You can also access or
read an array location, as shown here.
Well, on the right hand side of
the assignment statement we see
x sub 3 is used to assign or
write to a value on the left hand side
of your assignment statement x sub 2.
Once the storage is allocated for
an array, the array size does not change.
This may be why.length is not a method but
a value.
When an array is passed to a method,
the contents of the locations
referenced by the array can change.
This is subtle, and you'll see examples of
it when we use arrays to solve problems.
Have fun coding.